Forest Policy and Economics 136 (2022) 102689
Available online 13 January 2022
1389-9341/© 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Sectoral policies cause incoherence in forest management and ecosystem 
service provisioning 
Clemens Blattert a,b,*, Kyle Eyvindson a,b,c,d, Markus Hartikainen e, Daniel Burgas a,b, 
Maria Potterf a,b, Jani Lukkarinen f, Tord Sn¨all g, Astor Tora˜no-Caicoya h, Mikko M¨onkk¨onen a,b 
a Department of Biological and Environmental Science, University of Jyv¨askyl¨a, P.O. Box 35, 40014 Jyv¨askyl¨a, Finland 
b School of Resource Wisdom, University of Jyv¨askyl¨a, P.O. Box 35, 40014 Jyv¨askyl¨a, Finland 
c Natural Resource Institute Finland (LUKE), Laatokartanonkaari 9, 00790 Helsinki, Finland 
d Faculty of Environmental Sciences and Natural Resource Management, Norwegian University of Life Sciences, P.O. Box 5003, NO-1432 Ås, Norway 
e Silo AI, 5th Floor, Fredrikinkatu 57 C, 00100 Helsinki, Finland 
f Finnish Environment Institute (SYKE), Latokartanonkaari 11, 00790 Helsinki, Finland 
g SLU Swedish Species Information Centre, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, P.O. Box 7007, 75007 Uppsala, Sweden 
h Chair of Growth and Yield Science, TUM School of Life Sciences, Hans-Carl-von-Carlowitz-Platz 2, 8354 Freising, Germany   
A R T I C L E  I N F O   
Keywords: 
Forest policy 
Ecosystem services 
Biodiversity 
Multi-objective optimization 
Forest management 
Climate change 
A B S T R A C T   
Various national policies guide forest use, but often with competing policy objectives leading to divergent 
management paradigms. Incoherent policies may negatively impact the sustainable provision of forest ecosystem 
services (FES), and forest multifunctionality. There is uncertainty among policymakers about the impacts of 
policies on the real world. We translated the policy documents of Finland into scenarios including the quanti­
tative demands for FES, representing: the national forest strategy (NFS), the biodiversity strategy (BDS), and the 
bioeconomy strategy (BES). We simulated a Finland-wide systematic sample of forest stands with alternative 
management regimes and climate change. Finally, we used multi-objective optimization to identify the combi­
nation of management regimes matching best with each policy scenario and analysed their long-term effects on 
FES. 
The NFS scenario proved to be the most multifunctional, targeting the highest number of FES, while the BES 
had the lowest FES targets. However, the NFS was strongly oriented towards the value chain of wood and 
bioenergy and had a dominating economic growth target, which caused strong within-policy conflicts and 
hindered reaching biodiversity targets. The BDS and BES scenarios were instead more consistent but showed 
either sustainability gaps in terms of providing timber resources (BDS) or no improvements in forest biodiversity 
(BES). All policy scenarios resulted in forest management programs dominated by continuous cover forestry, set- 
aside areas, and intensive management zones, with proportions depending on the policy focus. Our results 
highlight for the first time the conflicts among national sectoral policies in terms of management requirements 
and effects on forest multifunctionality. The outcomes provide leverage points for policymakers to increase 
coherence among future policies and improve implementation of multiple uses of forests.   
1. Introduction 
Forests provide a wide range of ecosystem services demanded by the 
society, like wood and non-wood forest goods as provisioning services, 
carbon storage, nutrient and water cycles as regulating services, as well 
as cultural services like recreation. Additionally, forests play a key role 
for biodiversity conservation (Forest Europe, 2020; MEA, 2005; Wolf­
slehner et al., 2019). These societal benefits, commonly referred to as 
forest ecosystem services (FES), have become the focus of a number of 
European policies (Bouwma et al., 2018; EASAC, 2017; Primmer et al., 
2021). 
The EU forest strategy (EC, 2013, 2021) recognizes FES more 
* Corresponding author at: Department of Biological and Environmental Science, University of Jyv¨askyl¨a, P.O. Box 35, FI-40014 Jyv¨askyl¨a, Finland. 
E-mail addresses: clemens.c.blattert@jyu.fi (C. Blattert), kyle.eyvindson@luke.fi (K. Eyvindson), markus.hartikainen@silo.ai (M. Hartikainen), daniel.d.burgas@ 
jyu.fi (D. Burgas), maria.m.potterf@jyu.fi (M. Potterf), jani.lukkarinen@syke.fi (J. Lukkarinen), tord.snall@slu.se (T. Sn¨all), astor.torano-caicoya@tum.de 
(A. Tora˜no-Caicoya), mikko.monkkonen@jyu.fi (M. M¨onkk¨onen).  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Forest Policy and Economics 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/forpol 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.forpol.2022.102689 
Received 14 June 2021; Received in revised form 9 December 2021; Accepted 3 January 2022   
Forest Policy and Economics 136 (2022) 102689
2
explicitly than any other policy and aims to balance the delivering of 
various FES and meeting the societal demands (Bouwma et al., 2018). In 
addition, forest issues are addressed by disparate sector policies. Even 
though these policies do not always directly refer to FES, they address 
the functions of forest ecosystems that benefit society (Primmer et al., 
2021). The EU biodiversity strategy aims to halt the loss and restore 
biodiversity and ecosystem services (EC, 2011). The new EU biodiversity 
strategy promotes an increase in sustainable management and forest 
resilience against climate change. Further, it aims to protect 30% of the 
EU’s land area, out of which 10% are strictly protected, including all 
remaining primary and old-growth forests (EC, 2020). At the same time, 
the bioeconomy strategy emphasizes a transition from a fossil-based to a 
bio-based economy, causing increased timber demands (EC, 2018). 
Overall, the coherence among existing EU-level sectoral policies is 
moderate, and the implementation of these policies is not coordinated 
(Bouwma et al., 2018; Wolfslehner et al., 2020). The lack of policy 
coherence is expected to create undesired trade-offs among FES, which 
in turn may decrease sustainability (Nabuurs et al., 2019; Nilsson et al., 
2012; Winkel and Sotirov, 2015), particularly due to the uncertainty of 
climate change, which strongly affects European forests (Hanewinkel 
et al., 2013; Lindner et al., 2010; McDowell et al., 2020). 
Unlike in agriculture, there is no common agreed EU forest policy 
among member states, due to factors like sectoral and institutional 
competition, and different economic interests. Instead, a collection of 
distinct and disintegrated policy initiatives exists at the member state 
level, guiding the management of FES and handling contradictions and 
conflicts (Pülzl et al., 2018; Winkel and Sotirov, 2015; Wolfslehner et al., 
2020). In the case of Finland, the biodiversity strategy (FME, 2012), the 
bioeconomy strategy (FMME et al., 2014), and the national forest policy 
(FMAF, 2015, 2019), are the sectoral policies that handle resources for 
the provision of FES. National sectoral policies represent an operation­
alized version of the EU level counterparts, reflecting the demands 
Finnish policies place on FES (Primmer et al., 2021), and coordinating 
the diverse stakeholder interests (Harrinkari et al., 2016). The general 
pathway in the Finnish forest policy is to produce “more of everything”, 
co-aligned with the global bioeconomy discourse to safeguard the use of 
forest resources, which contributes to the legitimisation of intensive 
management practices (Kr¨oger and Raitio, 2017). In 2018, the total 
roundwood harvest in Finland was the highest ever with 78.2 million 
cubic meters (24% higher than the average over the preceding ten-year 
period). At the same time, around 11% of the forest is strictly protected. 
However, the majority of the protected forest (80%) is located in the low 
productive northern parts of Finland (Peltola et al., 2019). The priori­
tisation of production over ecological objectives is causing underlying 
conflicts within the Finnish forest policy pathway, which are not openly 
addressed (Kr¨oger and Raitio, 2017). 
To understand the conflicts among disintegrated sectoral policies 
and to identify synergies in ways forward, it is crucial to understand how 
the FES targets within the strategies plays out in the form of long-term 
levels and what management is needed to achieve the policy targets. 
Eyvindson et al. (2018) showed that increased timber harvests following 
the Finnish bioeconomy targets are causing trade-offs with the conser­
vation capacity of the forest landscape and its ability to provide multiple 
FES. 
The method of multi-objective optimization is widely used to alle­
viate conflicts between increasing harvest demands and sustaining non- 
woody FES (e.g. Chen et al. (2016); Eggers et al. (2020a); Knoke et al. 
(2016); Mazziotta et al. (2017)). It can be used to study how manage­
ment targeting a focal objective affects another objective, and resolve 
conflicts by finding compromise solutions that balance among multiple 
FES objectives in the landscape (Mazziotta et al., 2017). For example, 
Pohjanmies et al. (2017) solved conflicts between provisioning and 
regulating services, and biodiversity conservation by identifying man­
agement solutions that minimized the losses of all objectives. Eyvindson 
et al. (2019) quantified the conflicts among different interest groups in 
forest resource management. Eggers et al. (2020b) revealed to 
stakeholders how their management preference plays out concerning 
economic and ecological indicators. Finally, the method was recently 
used to explore how the banning of clear-cutting management, advo­
cated by Finnish citizen initiative to promote biodiversity, will reduce 
the future forest landscape multifunctionality (Eyvindson et al., 2021). 
Generally, there are large unrealized potentials for “win-win” manage­
ment strategies that increase overall multifunctionality of landscapes 
(van der Plas et al., 2018), which are efficiently explored and revealed 
using this method. 
Even though securing multiple FES has been identified as a key 
condition for overall sustainability of forest use (EASAC, 2017), the 
complex management drivers arising from the FES targets stated in 
sectoral policies are not well understood and have not gained much 
attention. Previous research tackled the question of conflicting forest 
sectoral policies only from the governance perspective (Bouwma et al., 
2018; Primmer et al., 2021; Sotirov and Storch, 2018; Winkel and 
Sotirov, 2015), with limited focus on their long-term impact on actual 
FES levels in the forest. This is a serious drawback, because we do not 
know the potential inefficiencies resulting from policy incoherence at 
the level of forest landscapes. The scarce research on policy drivers for 
FES might depend on the different time perspectives between forest 
ecosystems (rather inert and long-term systems) and sectoral policy 
strategies (rather dynamic and short-term systems). Further, policies are 
based on specific sectoral interests and preparation processes, while 
their implementation is coordinated at the level of forest management. 
Additionally, policies and their objectives are quite often “fluffily” 
formulated, making it challenging to quantitatively assess and analyse 
the consequences of their implementation within forest management 
planning. This requires a framework that facilitates the holistic analysis 
of policy documents by standardising references to FES, as recently 
presented by Primmer et al. (2021), to gain information for strategic 
forest planning purposes. 
This paper aims to close the gap between governance research and 
long-term forest ecosystem management research to investigate the ef­
fects of sectoral policies on forest landscapes, and their ability to provide 
FES. Using Finland as a case study, we ask: I) How can national sectoral 
policies for forestry, biodiversity and bioeconomy translate into explicit 
scenarios that can be quantitatively evaluated? II) What is the required 
forest management program (a combination of management regimes) 
that best fulfil the FES demands given by different policies? III) What are 
the long-term effects of the policies and their associated, resulting 
management programs on FES? IV) Are such policies causing sustain­
ability gaps in terms of FES? To answer these questions, we analysed 
three sectoral policies on societal demands for nine FES categories, 
adopting the policy analysis framework of Primmer et al. (2021). We 
used multi-objective optimization to identify management programs 
that achieved policy demands and analysed their impacts on FES. The 
basis for the optimization was simulations of long-term forest dynamics 
and management of a forest sample representing the national scale 
(Fig. 1). 
2. Method 
2.1. Study region and data 
Finnish national forest sectoral policies are addressing the whole 
boreal forest land in Finland, which accounts for 86% of the land area 
(including 10% of unproductive forest area). According to the 12th 
national forest inventory (NFI), half of the growing stock in Finland is 
made up of pine (Pinus sylvestris), 30% is spruce (Picea abies), 17% is 
birch (Betula pendula, B. pubescens) and the remaining 3% are other 
broadleaved trees. The annual increment totalled 108 Mm3, with a mean 
of 6.9 m3ha−1 in southern and 3.2 m3ha−1 in northern Finland. 
Approximately, two-thirds of the forest land is on mineral soil, with the 
remaining part on peatlands. Peatland areas have, however, decreased 
during the past several decades, due to ditching, resulting in the 
C. Blattert et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Forest Policy and Economics 136 (2022) 102689
3
vegetation and growth of trees typical of mineral soils. Around 11% of 
the forest land in Finland is under strict protection (Peltola et al., 2019). 
To accurately represent the forest conditions across Finland and at 
the same time to allow reasonable computation time for data simulation 
and optimization, we created a sub-sample of the stands from the 
Finnish Forest Centre.1 The publicly available data describe the forest 
situation at stand level over the whole of Finland, containing basic in­
formation about individual stands (e.g., location, soil type) and detailed 
information about their current structure (e.g., tree species distribution, 
tree density, tree size). Forest stands were selected along the regional 
and temporal specific NFI sampling grid; when a NFI plot centre falls 
into a stand this stand was noted (Fig. 2). In total, 39,445 stands were 
selected for our analysis showing an average age of 53.8 years (sd =
29.8). To account for the national scale, simulated stand outcomes 
(Section 2.2) were normalized to values per hectare and multiplied by 
the represented forest area of the NFI plot. We also recorded if a NFI plot 
centre was located in a statutory protected area, whereby management 
activities were not allowed. The data about the protected areas were 
freely available from the Finnish environmental Institute (SYKE).2 For 
details about data generation, see the supplementary material Appendix 
S1. 
2.2. Forest management simulation 
The forest dynamics and management was simulated using the open 
source forest simulator SIMO (Rasinm¨aki et al., 2009). SIMO simulates 
tree growth, mortality and regeneration for even-aged (Hynynen et al., 
2002) and uneven-aged boreal forests (Pukkala et al., 2013). For each 
forest stand, we simulated 29 management regimes in five-year periods 
from 2016 to 2116, with the exact number of management alternatives 
applied depending on the initial conditions of each individual stand (i.e. 
dominant stand height, basal area, site type, and stand age; Table 1). The 
regimes provided a diverse set of management alternatives for each 
stand out of which the optimization afterwards selected an ideal one 
based on the management effects on FES indicators. 
The regimes can be categorized into six classes based on their 
defining features, like harvest intensity, rotation time, green tree 
retention, time and number of thinnings, stand regeneration, and 
fertilization. The six classes are (Table 1): business as usual (BAU) re­
gimes with an even-aged rotation forest management according to the 
Finnish management guidelines (¨Aij¨al¨a et al., 2014); regimes with 
intensified (IBAU) and extensified (EBAU) versions of rotation forest 
management; regimes that increase the broadleave shares on medium 
fertile sites in southern and central Finland for better adaptation to 
climate change (ACC); continuous cover forestry (CCF) regimes that 
convert stands into permanently covered and diverse structured forests, 
and a setting aside (SA) regime with no management activities. Ap­
pendix S2 lists details of the management regimes. 
Forest development and management were simulated under three 
climate change scenarios: current climate, representative concentration 
pathways RCP2.6 and RCP4.5 scenario. The regional climate variables 
driving stand growth and soil dynamics (mean and amplitude of tem­
perature, CO2, concentration, precipitation) were based on Lehtonen 
et al. (2016), and the climate data of the Canadian Earth system model 
CanESM (von Salzen et al., 2013). The impact of climate variables on 
forest growth dynamics in SIMO was included based on climate sensitive 
statistical growth and yield models (Matala et al., 2006; Matala et al., 
2005). The simulations were conducted with high performance 
computational resources provided by CSC - IT Center for Science LTD 
(cPouta, https://research.csc.fi). 
2.3. Forest ecosystem services and indicators 
Simulated forest stand characteristics and harvested potential under 
Fig. 1. Illustration of the study approach. Finnish sectoral policies were analysed regarding their demands for forest ecosystem service (FES). Multi-objective 
optimization was used to identify management programs that achieved policy demands and the long-term management impact on FES was analysed. The basis 
for the optimization was national simulations of forest dynamics and management. 
1 http://www.metsaan.fi (March 2021).  
2 https://www.syke.fi/en-US/Open_information (March 2021). 
C. Blattert et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Forest Policy and Economics 136 (2022) 102689
4
the different management regimes and climate change scenarios were 
used to calculate indicators for FES assessments. The policy framework 
of Primmer et al. (2021) defines ten FES according to international 
classification schemes (Haines-Young and Potschin-Young, 2018; MEA, 
2005), allocating biodiversity conservation and resilience as regulating 
services. The ten FES were: wood production, bioenergy, non-wood 
forest products, and game animals (provisioning services); biodiversity 
conservation, water protection, climate regulation, and resilience 
(regulating services); as well as recreation and cultural heritage (cultural 
service). Except for the cultural heritage service, we linked to each FES 
our simulated indicators to assess their long-term provisioning (Table 2). 
Cultural heritage was not considered as we currently do not have 
empirical information or models to link forest structural characteristics 
with the emotional and spiritual relationships of citizens with forests. 
The FES wood production was measured by the simulated annual 
yearly increment (m3 ha−1 yr−1) and the periodically harvested timber 
volume (m3 ha−1). Bioenergy was assessed by the harvested biomass 
(m3 ha−1), which summarises the combined volume of harvest residues, 
uplifted tree stumps and roots. Uplifting stumps and roots were only 
simulated for spruce and pine stands under rotation forestry that are 
situated on fertile and medium fertile site types. 
Non-wood FES were assessed by the yield of bilberry, cowberry and 
marketable mushrooms, which are important non-timber products in the 
boreal forest (Miina et al., 2020; Wolfslehner et al., 2019). The yield (kg 
ha-1) for bilberry (Vaccinium myrtillus L.) (Miina et al., 2009) and 
cowberry (Vaccinium vitis-idaea L.) (Turtiainen et al., 2013) was pre­
dicted with models considering site and stand characteristics like basal 
area (BA) and the dominant tree species as independent variables. 
Marketed mushrooms yield (kg ha-1) was estimated using the models of 
Tahvanainen et al. (2016). The mushroom models were developed for 
Norway spruce dominated stands in eastern Finland, and therefore can 
overestimate expected yields for less productive forests over all of 
Finland. Yet, we include this measure for sake of quantitative compar­
ison on the suitability of alternative management regimes for this 
Fig. 2. The national scale of Finland was used as study area represented by a systematic sample of forest stands from the Finnish Forest Centre (www.metsaan.fi) 
along the National Forest Inventory (NFI11) sampling grid. 
Table 1 
The alternative management regimes applied in the forest growth simulations 
have been grouped into six categories. For details see Appendix S2.  
Management category 
Description 
Business as usual (BAU) 
Even-aged rotation forestry, according Finnish 
recommendations (¨Aij¨al¨a et al., 2014); rotation length 
between 70 and 90 years; final felling is determined by 
site type, dominant stand height and age; 5 retention 
trees ha−1; replanting after final felling; 1–3 thinnings 
during rotation 
Intensified BAU (IBAU) 
Modifications of BAU, regimes with shortened rotation 
length (−5 to −20 years); regimes with shortened 
rotation and additional fertilization (300 kg N ha−1) at 
basal area (BA) threshold of 14–20 m2 ha−1 
Extensified BAU (EBAU) 
Modifications of BAU, with either postponed final 
fellings (5, 15, 30 years) or with retention trees left after 
final felling (30 trees ha−1 or 30 m3 ha−1) 
Continuous Cover 
Forestry (CCF) 
Large trees are periodically removed (thinning from 
above) down to BA threshold (16–22 m2 ha−1 depending 
on site fertility); four different predefined BA thresholds; 
natural regeneration of stands 
Adaption to climate 
change (ACC) 
Modification of BAU, aims to increase resilience against 
climate change on the most prone medium fertile sites 
(Herb rich heath, Mesic heath) in Southern and Central 
Finland; replanted with broadleave trees after final 
felling 
Set aside (SA) 
No management activities, only tree growth, mortality 
and natural regeneration are simulated  
C. Blattert et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Forest Policy and Economics 136 (2022) 102689
5
important non-timber product. 
The FES game included three species: moose (Alces alces), western 
capercaillie (Tetrao urogallus), hazel grouse (Bonasia bonasa). We 
selected these species to represent a wide range of important game an­
imals in Finland. The occurrence of moose was measured with a species- 
specific habitat suitability index (HSI) describing their winter-feeding 
habitats based on the stand characteristics tree species mixture, stand 
density and height of trees (Kurttila et al., 2002). The HSI models 
describing the stand characteristics for the occurrence of capercaillie 
and hazel grouse were taken from (M¨onkk¨onen et al., 2014). The HSI 
vary between 0 (unsuitable habitat) and 1 (most suitable habitat). 
According to the red list of habitat types in Finland (Kontula and 
Raunio, 2019), the most significant reasons for forest habitat types 
becoming red-listed are a reduction in deadwood, reduction in old- 
growth forests and individual old trees as well as changes in tree spe­
cies composition by reducing the share of deciduous trees. The biodi­
versity conservation value of the forest was thus measured by five 
separate variables: deadwood volume (m3 ha−1); percentage of decid­
uous trees in the standing tree volume (%); the number of large trees 
(diameter at breast height DBH > 40 cm); the share of stands that are 
managed by SA, representing strict protected areas; the share of stands 
that are managed with CCF (two regimes with reduced thinning in­
tensity, basal area threshold +3, +6 m2 ha−1) and an extensified BAU 
version with retention trees, representing biodiversity conservation 
oriented management in commercial forests. 
The water quality of lakes and streams depends on the management 
activities on adjacent forests. Intensive management with clear-cutting 
combined with ditches increase nutrient and sediments discharges to 
the water bodies, particularly on peatland (Marttila et al., 2020; Nie­
minen et al., 2017; Tolkkinen et al., 2020). As indicator for the FES 
water quality, we used the share of CCF on peatlands, which is seen as an 
economically and environmentally feasible management option to 
decrease negative water quality impacts (Nieminen et al., 2018). 
Climate regulation was measured by the carbon sink (t CO2 ha−1 
yr−1), which represents the change in carbon storage between two 
simulation time steps. Carbon storage was the sum of the total carbon 
held within standing timber, deadwood, and soil, converted in its cor­
responding CO2 content. The carbon of standing timber and deadwood 
was evaluated as 50% of the dry biomass. Deadwood decomposition was 
simulated using the models from M¨akinen et al. (2006). Soil carbon was 
quantified using two models; for mineral soil the Yasso07 model was 
used (Liski et al., 2005; Tuomi et al., 2011; Tuomi et al., 2009), and for 
peatland soils the carbon flux models by Ojanen et al. (2014), ac­
counting also for the initial carbon pool of peat soils. The carbon storage 
in wood products was not included since we consider the forest land­
scape as our system boundary. 
FES recreation was calculated using two indices (Pukkala et al., 
1988; Pukkala et al., 1995), which estimate people’s average opinion 
about the recreational value (recreation index) and beauty of forests 
(scenic index) of managed forest stands. The indices assume that the 
recreational values of forests increases with the age and size of trees, as 
well as increasing the shares of pines and birches. 
The aspect of resilience was quantified by the share of forest stands 
managed with the adaption regimes (ACC, see Table 2), applied in 
Table 2 
Three policy scenarios were optimized representing the Finnish national forest strategy, the biodiversity strategy and the bioeconomy strategy. Scenarios were 
described by the considered ecosystem service indicators, and the way indicators have been implemented in the multi-objective optimization: as objectives to be 
maximized, or as constraints. The optimal solution was approached stepwise in a lexicographic approach following the preferences set by the policies (indicated by 
column ‘step’).  
Forest ecosystem 
services (FES) 
Indicator (unit) 
National forest strategy 
(NFS)  
Biodiversity strategy 
(BDS)  
Bioeconomy strategy (BES)  
Objective / constraint 
step 
Objective / constraint 
step 
Objective / constraint 
step 
Wood production 
Increment (m3 ha−1 yr−1) 
Target in 2025: ≥115 Mm3; 
in 2050: ≥125 Mm3 
1      
Harvested roundwood (m3 
ha−1) 
Target in 2025: ≥80 Mm3 
1 
Maximize (even-flow) 
1 
Maximize even-flow under 
biodiversity constraints 
2 
Bioenergy 
Harvested biomass (m3 
ha−1) 
Target in 2025: ≥6.5 Mm3 
1   
Maximize even-flow under 
biodiversity constraints 
2 
Non-wood 
Bilberry (kg ha−1) 
No decline, maximize it 
further 
3      
Cowberry (kg ha−1) 
No decline, maximize it 
further 
3      
Mushrooms (kg ha−1) 
No decline, maximize it 
further 
3     
Game 
HSI moose (−) 
Maximize 
4 
Maximize 
1    
HSI capercaillie (−) 
Maximize 
4 
Maximize 
1    
HSI hazel grouse (−) 
Maximize 
4 
Maximize 
1   
Biodiversity 
Regime SA (−)   
Target of 17% 
1   
Conservation 
Conservation regimes*** 
(−) 
Target of ≥4.5% 
2 
Target of 4.5% 
1    
Deadwood (m3 ha−1) 
Target in 2025: avg. ≥8 
m3ha−1 
2 
Target in 2050: increase 
by 60% 
1 
No decline allowed, but no target 
1  
Deciduous tree volume (%) 
Maximize 
4 
Target in 2050: increase 
by 10% 
1 
No decline allowed, but no target 
1  
Large trees (DBH > 40 cm) 
(n ha−1) 
Maximize 
4 
Target in 2050: increase 
by 10% 
1 
No decline allowed, but no target 
1 
Water protection 
Only regimes CCF/SA on 
peatland (%) 
Enabled constraint 
1 
Enabled constraint 
1   
Climate regulation 
Carbon sink (t CO2 ha−1 
yr−1) 
Target in 2025: ≥27.88 
MtCO2 equivalent 
2 
*  
**  
Recreation 
Recreation index (−) 
Maximize 
4 
Maximize 
1 
Maximize 
2  
Scenic index (−) 
Maximize 
4 
Maximize 
1 
Maximize 
2 
Resilience 
CC adaption regimes (−) 
Maximize 
4 
*  
**  
* Indirectly addressed by importance of protected areas for carbon sinks; ** Indirectly addressed by exploiting timber resources; *** Conservation oriented regimes 
were represented by two CCF regimes with reduced thinning intensity (CCF_3, CCF_4), and an extensified BAU regime with retention tree (BAUwGTR, see Appendix S2 
for details on regimes). 
C. Blattert et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Forest Policy and Economics 136 (2022) 102689
6
Southern and Central Finland on medium fertile sites. It is widely 
acknowledged that minimizing the future effects of climate induced 
disturbances require an increase of broadleaves in the forest stands and 
landscape (Ven¨al¨ainen et al., 2020). 
2.4. Policy analysis 
The three Finnish sectoral policies analysed were: National Forest 
Strategy (NFS) (FMAF, 2015, 2019), Biodiversity Strategy (BDS) (FME, 
2012), and Bioeconomy Strategy (BES) (FMME et al., 2014). Therefore, 
we followed the recent work of Primmer et al. (2021), and their meth­
odological framework for categorizing and assessing how FES are 
mentioned in policy documents. Translating policy documents into a 
multi-objective optimization problem requires a detailed information on 
which FES are addressed, and what is the stated demand for FES in each 
policy. 
The framework used a coding scheme that weights how each FES in 
the documents is addressed, with a range from zero to four (0 = no 
mention; 1 = mentioned indirectly; 2 = mentioned directly but not an 
objective; 3 = stated as an objective but no stated targets or measures for 
implementation, 4 = central objective with clear targets and measures 
for implementation). For each policy document, Primmer et al. (2021) 
summarised how the FES are mentioned and extracted the correspond­
ing text parts (qualitative FES demands), which were filled into a tem­
plate and stored in a database. We further elaborated this approach and 
particularly focused on quantitative demands and indicators for FES 
explicitly indicated in each policy document. Stated policy demands and 
indicators for FES were then related to our simulated FES indicators and 
used to define a multi-objective optimization problem to be solved for 
each policy. A detailed overview of the policy analysis and the collected 
data is given in Appendix S3. 
2.5. Sectoral policies optimization 
The analysed FES demands of the sectoral policies were used to 
define individual objectives for each policy scenario, which were then 
jointly addressed within a unique multi-objective optimization problem 
(section 2.5.4). The aim of the optimization was to select an ideal 
management regime per stand and identify the optimal management 
combination best fulfilling the policy demands for FES. Therefore, the 
optimization alleviated conflicts among multiple FES by finding a 
compromise solution that minimizes the maximum deterioration among 
objectives. Sections 2.5.1 to 2.5.3 describe how the FES indicators were 
addressed in each policy optimization scenarios, further summarised in 
Table 2. Details are provided in Appendix S4. 
2.5.1. National forest strategy scenario 
The NFS defined clear quantitative yearly targets at the national 
scale for the increment (2025: 115 Mm3; 2050: on avg. 125 Mm3), 
harvested roundwood (80 Mm3), and biomass (6.5 Mm3). Monetary 
targets were not specified by the policy. Similarly, the policy stated 
targets for deadwood (2025: on avg. 8 m3 ha−1, south 5m3 ha−1, north 
10–11 m3 ha−1) and yearly carbon sinks in forests (2025: 27.88 MtCO2 
equivalent). These targets were considered as constraints that aimed to 
reach the demands until the defined years and maintain such demand 
levels for all years afterwards (Appendix S4, Eq. S1). Non-wood objec­
tives (bilberry, cowberry, mushrooms) were considered as constraints 
avoiding a decrease from the current state and aiming to maximize it 
simultaneously (Eq. S2). The NFS described them as by-products with an 
important and growing demand. The share of strictly protected forest 
areas in Finland (currently 10.6% of forestry land) was, according to the 
NFS, considered as large in international terms. To improve biodiversity 
protection, this scenario aims at increasing the proportion of biodiver­
sity conservation sites in managed forests. This was implemented 
through constraining the share of conservation regimes (see Table 2) to 
at least 4.5% from the beginning of the 100-year planning horizon (Eq. 
S3). This target represents three times the current situation of conser­
vation sites in commercial forests. The policy target for water regulation 
suggests the use of the best available management practice for its pro­
tection. This was implemented through constraining peatland manage­
ment to the use of CCF or SA regimes (Eq. S4). 
The FES representing recreation and the biodiversity goals for de­
ciduous and large trees were addressed as objectives to be maximized, 
with (Eq. S5): the recreation and scenic indices maximized for the worst 
case over all simulated years (minimum value); the deciduous and large 
trees (biodiversity) optimized towards the best case at the end of the 
planning horizon (last year). Similarly, the FES game was addressed, 
where we maximized for the average value over time to overcome zero 
HSI values that can arise under those “fuzzy” assessment for species 
habitat characteristics. The FES game was considered by the policy as an 
“important by-product”, but with decreasing game populations 
(particularly moose), because of the expected future decrease of habitats 
(spruce forests). To meet the resilience targets of the policy, we aimed to 
maximize the share of ACC regimes (Eq. S3). 
The overall complexity of the optimization problem and the prefer­
ences set by the policy on certain FES required using a lexicographic 
approach (Miettinen, 1999c), where objectives are optimized group­
wise. The first group of objectives optimized for was wood production 
and bioenergy under the constraints for water regulation. The optimal 
solution for this group then entered the following optimization step as 
constraints. For the second group, the target values of biodiversity and 
climate regulation were optimized. Third, the group of non-wood was 
optimized, and finally all remaining objectives. The rationale for the 
ordering of these groups was the emphasis found in the written policy 
documents (Table 2, Appendix S3). 
2.5.2. Biodiversity strategy scenario 
The BDS aims to ensure a favourable status of biodiversity and 
ecosystem services by 2050, for which Finland will urgently undertake 
effective actions designed to halt the loss of biodiversity. Therefore, the 
biodiversity indicators for deadwood, deciduous and large trees were 
implemented as constraints avoiding a decrease from the current state 
and aiming for a favourable status by 2050. Since the policy lacks clear 
numerical values, we defined numerical targets that should represent 
the urgent and effective actions demanded by the policy: deadwood 
should increase by 60%, deciduous and large trees by 10% (Appendix 
S4, Eq. S6). A target value of 17% for protected areas (SA) was set to 
follow the Convention on Biological Diversity, and a target value of 
4.5% for biodiversity conservation regimes in production forests was set, 
similar to NFS (Eq. S3). To achieve the stated water regulation targets, 
the constraint requiring that only CCF and SA were allowed on peatland 
was implemented (Eq. S4). The remaining services wood production, 
game, and recreation were implemented as objectives to be maximized, 
whereby the HSI for game, the recreation and scenic indices were 
addressed like in the NFS. Wood production was maximized for a 
continuous supply of harvested roundwood (even-flow) next to biodi­
versity constraints, as the policy aims to utilise the resources sustainably 
(Eq. S5). Climate regulation and resilience targets were indirectly 
addressed in the policy by increased shares of protected areas for carbon 
sinks, why no additional objectives were implemented. 
2.5.3. Bioeconomy strategy scenario 
Under the BES, Finland was considered to have high growth poten­
tial for roundwood and biomass for energy purpose, which are expected 
to increase further under climate change. The policy aims to simulta­
neously mobilize the resources for bioeconomy purposes and safeguard 
biodiversity. Therefore, the first lexicographic group aimed to maximize 
the even-flow of harvested roundwood and biomass (Appendix S4, Eq. 
S5), under the constraint that biodiversity does not decline (Eq. S6). In 
the second lexicographic group, the FES recreation was maximized 
under the constraints of maximum possible harvests and no decline in 
biodiversity (Eq. S5). Climate regulation and resilience were also 
C. Blattert et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Forest Policy and Economics 136 (2022) 102689
7
addressed by the policy, but with the logic that exploiting the forest 
resources will directly contribute to them. Thus, no additional objectives 
were considered. 
2.5.4. Multi-objective optimization implementation 
From a technical perspective, a single solution for each policy sce­
nario can be found through the formulation of unique multi-objective 
optimization problems (Miettinen, 1999a): 
minimize
x
{f1(x) , …, fn(x) }
subject x ∈S
(1)  
where fi(x) denotes the different objective functions, x the vector of 
management regimes that are to be chosen in the optimization, and S is 
the feasible set of management regimes determined by a set of 
constraints. 
The aim of the optimization is to seek out an efficient management 
solution for each stand, which is achieved through specifying constraints 
and objectives that are logically consistent. The stated requirements 
from the strategy can therefore be addressed by using Achievement 
scalarizing functions (ASF) (Wierzbicki, 1986) or by the epsilon- 
constraint method (Miettinen, 1999b). ASF functions can be seen as 
“soft targets” or reference points that are aimed to be achieved and 
relaxed if not feasible. Epsilon-constraints define instead strict upper/ 
lower targets that need to be achieved. The use of these approaches is to 
guarantee Pareto optimal solutions (i.e., a solution where none of the 
objectives can be improved without impairing one of the other solutions 
(Miettinen, 1999a)). For each scenario, we have developed a unique 
multi-objective optimization formulation meeting the stated and 
perceived objectives of each strategy (section 2.5.1 to 2.5.3). 
Individual objectives were normalized by using a pay-off table, were 
the evaluation of objective ranges (ideal and anti-ideal value) was 
conducted using single-objective problems that were maximized or 
minimized (based on the preferences for each objective). This allowed to 
jointly address the individual objectives when solving the problem and 
make them comparable. The final values for each individual objective 
were stored after the optimization procedure, including; the ideal, the 
anti-ideal, and the optimal solution. 
These values were further used for a graphical interpretation of the 
optimization outcomes in terms of provided FES demands and constraint 
achievement levels (section 3.1.2). Therefore, the individual optimal 
solutions were normalized in relation to the ideal and anti-ideal values 
of objective ranges: 
u(a) = a −a*
a* −a*
(2)  
where u(a) is the normalized optimal solution a related to the anti-ideal 
a* and ideal a* solution of the objective ranges. If objectives were 
addressing a clear target value (implemented as constraint), optimal 
solutions were further normalized in relation to the target value 
(Table 2, except enabled constraints). 
u(a) = a −a*
ta −a*
, if a < ta
(3)  
and 
u(a) = a
ta
, if a ≥ta
(4)  
where ta is the target value for a. These normalizations allowed a 
graphical interpretation on how good the optimal landscape manage­
ment fulfilled the societal demands stated by the policies. (section 
3.1.2). 
The multi-objective optimization framework was implemented in 
python and solved with CPLEX and conducted with high performance 
computational resources provided by CSC - IT Center for Science LTD 
(cPouta). To allow for demonstration we uploaded the Jupyter notebook 
on an online repository together with a sample dataset (https://github. 
com/maeehart/MultiForestDemonstration). 
3. Results 
3.1. Optimal management for policy scenarios 
3.1.1. Management programs 
The optimized forest stand management program was aggregated 
and illustrated as the percentage area assigned to each regime class 
(Fig. 3) and individual regimes (Appendix S4). There were clear differ­
ences between the policy scenarios in terms of optimal management 
programs. The traditional BAU regimes were rarely the optimal man­
agement across all scenarios. NFS received the maximum proportion of 
BAU (3.4%), which slightly decreased with increasing climate change. 
Overall, climate change showed only minor effects on the optimal 
management combination. SA, CCF, and IBAU was assigned the highest 
area shares across all optimized scenarios, which means a segregation in 
forest management across the forest landscapes. 
Under NFS, management class CCF received the highest share (up to 
41.2%), followed by IBAU and SA, and small amounts of EBAU. ACC was 
not part of the optimal solution. Under BDS, almost half of the forest was 
assigned to SA and the remaining half was split among the other man­
agement classes (except BAU). The BES scenario resulted in almost equal 
shares of IBAU (up to 33.1%) and SA (35.7%), followed by CCF (19.3%) 
and some shares for EBAU and ACC. 
3.1.2. Objective ranges and constraints 
Because of multiple, and often conflicting FES objectives within in­
dividual policy scenarios, the maximum level of the objectives for FES 
was not reached in any of the optimized scenarios (Fig. 4a, Fig. 5a, 
Fig. 6a). Thus, policies are not only compromises when developed by 
politics but also in practice in the forest – the maximum of all objectives 
cannot be reached. Moreover, the degree to which the maximum po­
tential level could be achieved strongly varied between optimized sce­
narios. The NFS scenario, for example, received relatively high levels of 
timber production and carbon sink objectives, but reached low levels in 
relation to the maximum particularly for biodiversity objectives 
(Fig. 4a). Under the BDS scenario, relatively high levels of recreation 
and some biodiversity related objectives (e.g., deadwood and share of 
deciduous trees) were reached, but timber production remained at a low 
level compared with potential maximum (Fig. 5a). The BES scenario 
performed well with respect to objectives related to bioenergy and 
timber production, but less well with respect to biodiversity (Fig. 6a). 
The policy scenarios can also be compared concerning whether their 
main objectives (constraints) as specified in the associated policy 
document can be reached or not. From this perspective, the scenario BDS 
is the most coherent as all its constraints can be achieved (Fig. 5b). 
Under the BES scenario, it was not possible to achieve bioenergy or 
timber production related objectives (only 75% of the maximum 
possible harvest) when simultaneously fulfilling biodiversity constraints 
(Fig. 6b). The NFS scenario showed a strong within-policy incoherence 
as in the optimal solution most objectives remained under the targeted 
levels (Fig. 4b). Notable is the discrepancy between objective and 
constraint achievement. Whereas targeted conservation regimes pre­
formed poor in terms of achieved objective levels (Fig. 4a), constraints 
were instead over exceeded (Fig. 4b). Vice versa it was the case for the 
increment objectives under the NFS scenario – high levels for objectives, 
whereas constraints were not achieved under current climate. Thus, 
climate change will likely change the situation increasing the possibility 
to achieve the alternative targeted levels in FES (red points, blue tri­
angles). However, the biodiversity objective of deadwood remained very 
far from the targeted level irrespective of the climate change scenario. 
C. Blattert et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Forest Policy and Economics 136 (2022) 102689
8
3.2. Forest ecosystem service flows under policies 
The optimal management solutions under the three policy scenarios 
resulted in drastic among-policy differences in the flow of FES (Fig. 7 
and Fig. 8). 
Harvested roundwood, biomass and increment (Fig. 7a-c), showed 
the effects of the constraints. NFS followed the 80 Mm3 roundwood and 
6.5 Mm3 biomass target from 2025 onwards. The increment showed a 
stepwise increase to meet the target values in 2025 (115 Mm3) and 2050 
(125 Mm3), which were finally only reached under RCP 4.5. BES 
maximized the constant flow of timber resources but mobilized less 
roundwood and more biomass in comparison to NFS. BDS showed the 
lowest harvests, with peaking values during the last third of the simu­
lation. This resulted from setting aside a large share of the area for 
conservation (mainly old stands with high ecological value), and as such 
causing a gap in harvested timber amounts. 
The biodiversity indicators deadwood and deciduous trees were the 
highest under BDS at the end of simulations (Fig. 7d,f), while the amount 
of large trees increased under all scenarios. The strongest effect was 
under NFS due to the promoted individual tree growth under the large 
share of CCF (Fig. 7e). For deadwood and deciduous trees, the NFS 
scenario resulted in a decline until the end of the simulation. A notable 
result is that the deadwood decline was reversed when targeted incre­
ment constraints under the FES were ignored, while the required har­
vests of this scenario could still be achieved, see Appendix S8. The 
scenario BES again showed the effect of the constraints, which allowed 
no decline. 
The non-wood indicator bilberry increased under all policy and 
climate change scenarios, except under BES and RCP 4.5 (Fig. 8a). It 
increased the most under BDS, but with climate change having a 
dampening effect. The temporary decline in NFS at 2021 explained that 
the constraint for this objective was not fulfilled (maximize the mini­
mum value over the time, see Fig. 4b). The same effect caused the un­
fulfilled constraint for cowberry under NFS, which decreased also below 
the initial value from 2096 onwards (Fig. 8b). However, cowberry 
showed a strong increase for NFS at the beginning, peaking at 2036, 
before it collapsed. Similarly, cowberry did develop under BES, but the 
collapse was less distinct. BDS showed a fluctuated development for 
cowberry peaking at 2101 parallel with harvests, (Fig. 7a), but resulting 
overall in a decline. Mushrooms overall declined under all policy sce­
narios, strongest under BDS. Climate change had a positive effect, 
leading even to a stable development under NFS and RCP 4.5 (Fig. 8c). 
The carbon sink was highest under NFS during the end, with up to 80 
Mt. CO2 per year stored in the forest to the end of the simulation 
(Fig. 8d). BDS resulted in the highest values at the beginning. Yet, the 
carbon sink collapsed during the second half of the simulation and 
became even negative, which correlated with the harvest peak. The BES 
led to a slight decrease in the carbon sink, with 28 MtCO2 per year stored 
in the forest at the end. Climate change increased the sink capacity due 
to increased growth. 
The game animals benefited most from the BDS scenario, but showed 
a decline under all three policy scenarios, with climate change having a 
minor effect (presented as the average for three HSI indices). The steep 
decline was influenced mostly by the HSI of capercaillie and hazel 
grouse, with the latter even close to extinction, whereas HSI for moose 
showed a slight increase to the end (see Appendix S4). The average of 
recreation and scenic index strongly increased under all policy sce­
narios, but with slightly higher values in the BDS. Both indices benefited 
from the larger proportion of areas with SA and CCF and the resulting 
old forest structural attributes (see Appendix S5). 
Fig. 3. Optimal management solution for the three policy scenarios representing the Finnish national forest strategy (NFS), the biodiversity strategy (BDS) and the 
bioeconomy strategy (BES). The management categories considered were business as usual (BAU), intensified (IBAU) and extensified BAU (EBAU), continuous cover 
forestry (CCF), adaption to climate change regimes (ACC) and setting aside (SA). The optimization was repeated for three climate change scenarios: current climate 
(noCC), RCP2.6 and RCP4.5. 
C. Blattert et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Forest Policy and Economics 136 (2022) 102689
9
Fig. 4. Achievement of individual objectives (a) and constraints (b) under the national forest strategy (cf. Table 2). a) Normalized optimal solution in relation to the 
possible objective ranges (ideal and anti-ideal solution, Eq. 2). b) Normalized optimal solution in relation to the targeted values illustrated as red dashed line (if 
solution lies below the target = Eq. 3, if solution matches or lies above = Eq. 4). Bars represent the outcomes for current climate, circle and triangle represent the 
solutions under RCP2.6 and RCP4.5, respectively. The first letters of the x-axis label indicate the ecosystem service category: BC = biodiversity conservation, BE =
Bioenergy, CR = climate regulation, G = game, NW = non-wood, Rec = recreation, Res = Resilience, WP = wood production. (For interpretation of the references to 
colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.) 
Fig. 5. Achievement of individual objectives (a) and constraints (b) under the biodiversity strategy (cf. Table 2). See Fig. 4 for explanation.  
C. Blattert et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Forest Policy and Economics 136 (2022) 102689
10
4. Discussion 
Analyses of policy documents have shown that they are incoherent 
and that their ecosystem services concept is rather weak (Bouwma et al., 
2018; Winkel and Sotirov, 2015). We show the long-term FES de­
ficiencies in the forests resulting from these incoherencies, and present 
the forest management needed to meet the societal demands of the 
policies. We further highlight the incoherencies within the Finnish na­
tional forest strategy as not all stated policy demands for FES can be 
jointly met. For better policy integration and implementation, it is 
important to understand these incoherencies, because they provide 
leverage points to balance the conflicting societal demands of current 
policies. There are apparent opportunities for strengthening the coher­
ence among policies at both national and regional levels (Bouwma et al., 
2018). 
4.1. Policy scenarios 
The translation of the policy demands into a multiple-objective op­
timizations was a critical task, since it significantly affected the results of 
this study. The policy framework of Primmer et al. (2021) provided a 
structured approach for the national policy analysis (Appendix S3). 
According to Primmer et al. (2021) and our analysis, FES were generally 
recognised in sectoral policies, but the number and detail in which they 
were addressed varied strongly, with NFS being the most comprehensive 
one. The most strongly emphasised FES were centred around existing 
value chains of wood and bioenergy (NFS and BES), as well as biodi­
versity conservation (BDS). In contrast, non-wood forest products, game, 
and the aspect of recreation, received little attention in individual pol­
icies. Further, those were generally described rather “fluffily”, without 
clear targets and measurements, which impedes their implementation 
and effectiveness. This vagueness is also partially deliberated and con­
nected with the engagement of diverse interest coalitions with contra­
dictory expectations on the formulation of policy agendas (Harrinkari 
et al., 2016). Resilience and climate regulation were mainly addressed 
indirectly through two different and contradictory mechanisms: forest 
area under protection (BDS), or sustainable use of timber resources 
(BES). 
The translation of policy demands into an optimization problem 
required inherent simplifications, representing the opinions and 
knowledge of the authors of this study, since only the NFS scenario 
provided clear quantitative targets. A slightly different preference 
setting (optimization steps) or implementation of each optimization 
objective might change the results considerably (as illustrated for the 
NFS scenario without increment constraint in Appendix S8). A sensi­
tivity analysis could show how stable results are, for example by 
adjusting constraint thresholds, or implementing individual objectives 
differently (e.g. switch constraints into maximize objective). Neverthe­
less, the size of our simulated forest data and the overall complexity of 
the optimization problem (several constraints often lead to infeasible 
solutions) would have made a sensitivity analysis very time-consuming. 
The optimal management outcomes we present thus cannot be taken for 
absolute, but rather represent one possible realization under each na­
tional forest policy, acknowledging that in practice all policies drive 
management and FES provision simultaneously. 
4.2. Climate change 
Climate change showed almost no effects on the optimal manage­
ment programs (Fig. 3), whereas the effects of climate were visible on 
the level of FES indicators (Figs. 7, 8). However, this result should not 
lead to the conclusion that the management effect on the final optimal 
solution is more important than climate change, as recent studies have 
shown the opposite (Seidl et al., 2019). One reason for the rather small 
effect on the optimal management was that climate-induced distur­
bances were not considered in our study. However, Finnish forests will 
likely experience higher disturbance activities under climate change, 
mainly caused by extreme drought, storm events, insect pests and forest 
fires (Ven¨al¨ainen et al., 2020). Including disturbances, either within the 
simulations (Perera et al., 2015; Seidl et al., 2011), or by additional 
Fig. 6. Achievement of individual objectives (a) and constraints (b) under the bioeconomy strategy (BES, cf. Table 2). See Fig. 4 for explanation.  
C. Blattert et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Forest Policy and Economics 136 (2022) 102689
11
disturbance risk indicators within the optimization (Díaz-Y´a˜nez et al., 
2019; Temperli et al., 2020), might affect the optimal management. 
Taking into account wind damage risk during our optimizations would 
probably decrease even-aged rotation forestry regimes in favour of less 
vulnerable uneven-sized stand structures (Pukkala et al., 2016), and 
regimes that increase broadleaves in forests (Hahn et al., 2021). 
Another reason for the small effect of climate change on the optimal 
management depends on the optimization problem itself. The BES and 
BDS scenarios strive for maximal harvests, under the constraints of 
biodiversity. The NFS scenario in contrast aims for high increment de­
mands that were only achieved under RCP4.5 (Fig. 4b). Both demands 
forced the harvesting of the increased growth due to warming, resulting 
in similar management programs under all the climate scenarios (see for 
example Appendix S8 and the changed management program under 
relaxed constraints on the increment). Hence, the non-effect of climate 
change on the optimal management was also driven by the targeted 
societal demands in our optimization. However, climate change will not 
only increase productivities in northern latitudes, but it is also expected 
to create suboptimal conditions for certain tree species (Kellom¨aki et al., 
2008; Torssonen et al., 2015; Ven¨al¨ainen et al., 2020). Future studies 
should account for the potential negative effects of climate change on 
forest growth and FES provisioning (Hanewinkel et al., 2013; Jonsson 
et al., 2020). 
4.3. Forest ecosystem services 
The FES demands for resilience were rather weakly addressed within 
all sectoral policies (Appendix S3), which also contributed to the low 
climate sensitivity of the scenarios. In the BDS, resilience is strived for 
with the logic to integrate protected areas into the forest landscape 
(FME, 2012). The primary logic of the BES and NFS policy documents is 
that resilience will be achieved, if the increased growth potential will be 
exploited sustainably for timber production (FMAF, 2015, 2019; FMME 
et al., 2014). Due to these rather weak resilience targets, our adaptation 
regimes that aimed for higher broadleaves shares remained zero under 
NFS, and reached only a few percent for BDS and BES in the optimal 
management solution (Fig. 3). Sufficient resistance and resilience ca­
pacity of forests against future uncertainties, however, requires the use 
of the most efficient management and silvicultural practices across the 
forest landscape (Messier et al., 2019; Mina et al., 2020), addressing 
ideally also the social resilience component that focuses on the consis­
tent flow of societal demands (Nikinmaa et al., 2020). Striving primary 
for high timber production and high growth rates are as such not 
appropriate policy targets to face the future uncertainties. 
Strong growth paradigms of the policies showed negative conse­
quences for biodiversity targets, by reducing deadwood amounts and 
shares of broadleaves in forests (Fig. 7d). This especially concerned the 
NFS scenario and led to strong incoherence within the policy (Fig. 4b). 
Trade-offs between an economically oriented management and biodi­
versity have also been reported by several other optimization studies 
(Eggers et al., 2020b; Eyvindson et al., 2018; Pohjanmies et al., 2017; 
Repo et al., 2020). The growth rates of forests are the highest in the early 
succession (Lynch and Zhang, 2011). Policy targets that aim for high 
increments thus hinder biodiversity objectives of old forest structures. 
According to Otero et al. (2020), policies should acknowledge the con­
flict between economic growth and biodiversity conservation and move 
beyond the growth paradigm to halt the global biodiversity decline, and 
enhance overall prosperity. Relaxing the increment constraint in the 
Fig. 7. Effect of the optimal management for policy scenarios on the future development of forest ecosystem service indictors under three climate change scenarios: 
current climate (no CC), RCP2.6, RCP4.5. Figure: a) - c) represent the area weighted sum and d) - e) the area weighted average over stands (NFS = national forest 
strategy, BDS = biodiversity strategy, BES = bioeconomy strategy). 
C. Blattert et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Forest Policy and Economics 136 (2022) 102689
12
NFS scenario considerably increased the deadwood amount in forests 
while simultaneously achieving the roundwood and biomass targets of 
the policy (Appendix S8). Compared to the 1950s, the total increment in 
Finland has almost doubled, with 108 Mm3 in the latest NFI (Peltola 
et al., 2019). Thus, stepping back from the high increment targets could 
considerably increase the coherence among multiple FES. We found that 
decoupling the policy from economic growth, as suggested by Otero 
et al. (2020), will offer higher shares of protected forest sites (Appendix 
S8). The SA shares even increased under climate change (36% no CC, 
44% RCP 4.5), as the harvest targets could be achieved on a smaller 
managed forest area (due to climate-induced growth). This offered in 
turn more room for protection (Appendix S8). 
Within policy conflicts among FES did not only result from inco­
herent policy targets but also due to real-life trade-offs among services 
and indicators. An example was the targeted FES game under NFS and 
BDS, which decreased under both scenarios, caused by the indicators for 
capercaillie and hazel grouse (Fig. 8, Appendix S6). According to 
M¨onkk¨onen et al. (2014), those species mainly benefit from extensified 
BAU regimes, with longer rotation age and green tree retention, whereas 
both policy scenarios showed high shares of continuous cover forestry 
combined with setting aside. In contrast, indicator moose benefited from 
more intensified management with shorter rotation (I-BAU), since 
moose prefers younger stands as habitats (Kurttila et al., 2002). Policies 
need to consider such “real-life” trade-offs and provide solutions and 
instruments helping to disentangle them at the level of forest 
management. 
4.4. Optimal forest management 
The regimes continuous cover forestry (CCF) and setting aside (SA), 
together with the more extensive managements (EBAU and ACC), 
contributed to 2/3 of the optimal management under NFS and BES. 
Considering CCF and EBAU as more conservation oriented manage­
ments, both scenarios would thus easily exceed the 30% protection 
targets of EU policies (EC, 2020, 2021). The remaining 1/3 of the area 
was covered by intensified management (IBAU). Under the BDS sce­
nario, half of the forest landscape was instead suggested to be protected 
(Fig. 3), with strong negative effects on wood production and bioenergy 
services (Fig. 7). The suggested separation of the forest landscape into 
clearly protected, and more extensively managed areas (combining CCF, 
EBAU, and ACC) with primary focus on non-wood and conservation 
values, as well as intensively used areas for production purposes follows 
the land sparing or segregation approach (Blattert et al., 2018; Car­
pentier et al., 2016; Cˆot´e et al., 2010; Messier et al., 2009). By allocating 
the land to areas with different management purposes, conflicts among 
FES will be minimized and the overall multifunctionality of the forest 
landscape will increase. Further, our suggested management regime 
shares are in line with the recently presented reference model for boreal 
forests of Berglund and Kuuluvainen (2021) (ASIO model), a manage­
ment guideline that aims to mimic natural disturbance processes. For 
attaining favourable forest conservation and ecosystem status, the 
model suggests that approximately 1/3 of the forests should be managed 
by even-aged, and 2/3 with individual gap and cohort dynamics (mainly 
corresponding to SA and CCF), while additionally emphasizing late 
successional forests. 
Fig. 8. Effect of the optimal management for policy scenarios on the future development of forest ecosystem service indicators, under three climate change scenarios: 
current climate (noCC), RCP2.6, RCP4.5. Figure: d) represents the area weighted sum and all others the area weighted average over stands (NFS = national forest 
strategy, BDS = biodiversity strategy, BES = bioeconomy strategy). Fuzzy indicators of three habitat suitability indices (HSI) for game, and two recreation indices 
were averaged. 
C. Blattert et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Forest Policy and Economics 136 (2022) 102689
13
The optimization study of Eyvindson et al. (2021) recently also 
suggested that larger proportions of the forests in Finland should be 
managed by CCF to achieve higher landscape multifunctionality. 
Indeed, CCF has the potential to become an important management in 
boreal forests, as it has greater ability to simultaneously provide mul­
tiple FES (Peura et al., 2018; Pukkala et al., 2016). CCF is considered 
more efficient than rotation forestry as the resulting forest conditions are 
less sensitive to changes in management objectives (Pukkala, 2016). The 
main difference between our results and Eyvindson et al. (2021) is that 
large proportions of the forest landscape suggested to be managed with 
intensified regimes, including fertilization (Appendix S5). The simulated 
fertilization increased the stand growth, explaining why the regimes 
were primary selected in the optimization aiming to achieve demands 
for wood production and bioenergy. However, we did not consider the 
negative ecological consequences of fertilization activities (Hedwall 
et al., 2014), neither the costs of fertilization, both reducing the share of 
fertilization regimes. Thus, our result should not be interpreted as a 
promotion of fertilization, but highlight that also intensive rotation 
forestry is required to satisfy future demands for timber resources, 
particularly in the era of circular bioeconomy (Hetem¨aki et al., 2017). 
All scenarios suggested a major change from current management 
practices in Finland, which is dominated by even-aged rotation forestry 
(our BAU) (Peltola et al., 2019). Policies should therefore also define 
instruments that support the management transition, since the opti­
mized managements currently seem not to be feasible in a market 
economy with multiple actors. This would require appropriate subsi­
dizing systems that motivate forest owners to manage their forests for 
biodiversity policy targets and compensate harvest revenue losses (i.e., 
subsidize longer rotations, CCF management actions and setting aside). 
Additionally, instruments would be needed that motivate forest owners 
to adjust their management for bioeconomy purpose and intensify forest 
use. Corresponding programs already exist in Finland, like the METSO- 
program, which compensates forest owners for setting-aside their forests 
for protection, or the KEMERA-program, which subsidizes tending and 
thinning of forest stands, building roads and fertilization. Such in­
centives would require further developments if policy targets should be 
implemented successfully in the future. 
5. Conclusion 
The combination of governance and long-term forest management 
planning research provided novel insights into the design of Finnish 
forest management resulting from sectoral policies. Our research high­
lighted the incoherence among inspected policies in terms of manage­
ment and impact on forest ecosystem services (FES). Studying the policy 
drivers for forest management and the resulting FES trade-offs is 
particularly relevant when developing new policies and forest man­
agement paradigms. It provides leverage points for better integration of 
multiple FES in future policies to overcome socio-ecological land-use 
conflicts in forests. 
All scenarios suggested major changes in forest management 
compared with the current practices to meet the policy demands for FES. 
However, to successfully achieve such demands in the future there 
would be a need to develop policy instruments guiding forest owners in 
their management (e.g. subsidizing). From a management decision and 
implementation point of view, it would also be beneficial if multiple FES 
are addressed clearly and holistically in sectoral policies, including non- 
timber objectives, and describing the management types to achieve the 
policy objectives. Further, the Finnish forest policies have to go beyond 
an economic growth paradigm (e.g., high annual increment targets 
under NFS) to achieve higher multifunctionality, as current policies lead 
to strong incoherence with biodiversity targets. We also underline that 
future policies need to more clearly address the targets and management 
approaches to increase the resilience of the Finnish forest against the 
uncertainties of climate change. 
Author contributions 
CB, MM, KE: conceptualization of the study. CB, MP, KE, JL: data 
curation. MM, TS: Funding acquisition. MH, KE, CB, AT: Optimization 
methodology and software. CB, KE: Simulation and optimization. DB, 
KE: Project admin and supervision. CB: Data analysis and writing of 
original draft. All authors contributed substantially to the writing of the 
article and approved the submitted version. 
Declaration of Competing Interest 
The authors declare no competing interests. 
Acknowledgement 
We thank the two anonymous reviewers whose comments helped to 
improve and clarify this manuscript. We also wish to thank CSC - IT 
Center for Science LTD for providing the high performance computa­
tional resources. This work was conducted within the project Multi­
Forest, which is supported under the umbrella of ERA-NET Cofund 
ForestValue by: Academy of Finland (aka 326321), Business Finland, 
Federal Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry, Environment & Water Man­
agement (Austria), Agency for Renewable Resources (Germany), 
Research Council of Norway, Vinnova (2018-04982; Sweden). Forest­
Value has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 
research and innovation program under grant agreement N◦773324. 
Finally, the study received funding through the 2017-2018 Belmont 
Forum and BiodivERsA joint call for research proposals, under the 
BiodivScen ERA-Net Cofund program, and with the funding organisation 
Academy of Finland (aka 326309). 
Appendix A. Supplementary data 
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.forpol.2022.102689. 
References 
¨Aij¨al¨a, O., Koistinen, A., Sved, J., Vanhatalo, K., V¨ais¨anen, P., 2014. Hyv¨an 
mets¨anhoidon Suositukset [Good Forest Management Recommendations]. Forestry 
Development Center Tapio [In Finnish]. 
Berglund, H., Kuuluvainen, T., 2021. Representative boreal forest habitats in northern 
Europe, and a revised model for ecosystem management and biodiversity 
conservation. Ambio 50, 1003–1017. 
Blattert, C., Lemm, R., Thees, O., Hansen, J., Lexer, M.J., Hanewinkel, M., 2018. 
Segregated versus integrated biodiversity conservation: value-based ecosystem 
service assessment under varying forest management strategies in a Swiss case study. 
Ecol. Indic. 95, 751–764. 
Bouwma, I., Schleyer, C., Primmer, E., Winkler, K.J., Berry, P., Young, J., Carmen, E., 
ˇSpulerov´a, J., Bez´ak, P., Preda, E., Vadineanu, A., 2018. Adoption of the ecosystem 
services concept in EU policies. Ecosyst. Serv. 29, 213–222. 
Carpentier, S., Filotas, E., Handa, I.T., Messier, C., 2016. Trade-offs between timber 
production, carbon stocking and habitat quality when managing woodlots for 
multiple ecosystem services. Environ. Conserv. 44, 14–23. 
Chen, S., Shahi, C., Chen, H.Y.H., 2016. Economic and ecological trade-off analysis of 
forest ecosystems: options for boreal forests. Environ. Rev. 24, 348–361. 
Cˆot´e, P., Tittler, R., Messier, C., Kneeshaw, D.D., Fall, A., Fortin, M.J., 2010. Comparing 
different forest zoning options for landscape-scale management of the boreal forest: 
possible benefits of the TRIAD. For. Ecol. Manag. 259, 418–427. 
Díaz-Y´a˜nez, O., Arias-Rodil, M., Mola-Yudego, B., Gonz´alez-Olabarria, J.R., Pukkala, T., 
2019. Simulating the effects of wind and snow damage on the optimal management 
of Norwegian spruce forests. Forestry 92, 406–416. 
EASAC, 2017. Multi-Functionality and Sustainability in the Eurpean Union’s Forests. 
EASAC Policy Report 32. Eurpean Academies’ Science Advisory Council, p. 43. 
EC, 2011. Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the 
Council, the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions. In: 
Our life insurance, our natural capital: an EU biodiversity strategy to 2020. COM 
(2011) 244 final, Brussels.  
EC, 2013. Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the 
Council, the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions. In: 
A new EU Forest Strategy: for forests and the forest-based sector. COM(2013) 659 
final, Brussels.  
EC, 2018. Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the 
Council, the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions. In: 
C. Blattert et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Forest Policy and Economics 136 (2022) 102689
14
A sustainable Bioeconomy for Europe: Strengthening the connection between 
economy, society and the environment. COM(2018) 673 final, Brussels.  
EC, 2020. Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the 
Council, the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions. In: 
EU Biodiversity Strategy for 2030. Bringing nature back into our lives. COM(2020) 
380 final, Brussels.  
EC, 2021. Communitaion from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, 
the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee for the Regions. 
In: New EU Forest Strategy for 2030. COM(2021) 572 final, Brussels.  
Eggers, J., Melin, Y., Lundstr¨om, J., Bergstr¨om, D., ¨Ohman, K., 2020a. Management 
strategies for wood fuel harvesting—trade-offs with biodiversity and Forest 
ecosystem services. Sustainability 12, 4089. 
Eggers, J., R¨aty, M., ¨Ohman, K., Sn¨all, T., 2020b. How well do stakeholder-defined Forest 
management scenarios balance economic and ecological Forest values? Forests 11, 
86. 
Eyvindson, K., Repo, A., M¨onkk¨onen, M., 2018. Mitigating forest biodiversity and 
ecosystem service losses in the era of bio-based economy. Forest Policy Econ. 92, 
119–127. 
Eyvindson, K., Repo, A., Trivi˜no, M., Pynn¨onen, S., M¨onkk¨onen, M., 2019. Quantifying 
and easing conflicting goals between interest groups in natural resource planning. 
Can. J. For. Res. 49, 1233–1241. 
Eyvindson, K., Duflot, R., Trivi˜no, M., Blattert, C., Potterf, M., M¨onkk¨onen, M., 2021. 
High boreal forest multifunctionality requires continuous cover forestry as a 
dominant management. Land Use Policy 100, 104918. 
FMAF, 2015. National Forest Strategy 2025 – Government Resolution of 12 February 
2015. Publications of the Finnish Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry (FMAF) 6b/ 
2015, Helsinki, p. 56. 
FMAF, 2019. The National Forest Strategy 2025 – An Updated Version Government 
Resolution of 21 February 2019. Publications of the Finnish Ministry of Agriculture 
and Forestry (FMAF) 2019:17, Helsinki, p. 124. 
FME, 2012. Saving Nature for People - National Action Plan for the Conservation and 
Sustainable Use of Biodiversity in Finland 2013–2020. Publikation of the Finnish 
Ministry of the Environment (FME), Finland, p. 105. 
FMME, FMAF, FME, 2014. Finnish Bioeconomy Strategy - Sustainable Growth from 
Bioeconomy. Publication of the Finnish Ministry of Employment and Economy 
(FMEE), Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry (FMAF), Ministry of the Environment 
(FME), Finland, p. 30. 
Forest Europe, 2020. State of Europe’s Forests 2020. 
Hahn, T., Eggers, J., Subramanian, N., Tora˜no Caicoya, A., Uhl, E., Sn¨all, T., 2021. 
Specified resilience value of alternative forest management adaptations to storms. 
Scand. J. For. Res. 1–13. 
Haines-Young, R., Potschin-Young, M.B., 2018. Revision of the common international 
classification for ecosystem services (CICES V5.1): a policy brief. One Ecosyst. 3, 
e27108. 
Hanewinkel, M., Cullmann, D.A., Schelhaas, M.-J., Nabuurs, G.-J., Zimmermann, N.E., 
2013. Climate change may cause severe loss in the economic value of European 
forest land. Nat. Clim. Chang. 3, 203–207. 
Harrinkari, T., Katila, P., Karppinen, H., 2016. Stakeholder coalitions in forest politics: 
revision of Finnish forest act. Forest Policy Econ. 67, 30–37. 
Hedwall, P.-O., Gong, P., Ingerslev, M., Bergh, J., 2014. Fertilization in northern forests – 
biological, economic and environmental constraints and possibilities. Scand. J. For. 
Res. 29, 301–311. 
Hetem¨aki, L., Hanewinkel, M., Muys, B., Ollikainen, M., Palahí, M., Trasobares, A., 2017. 
Leading the Way to a European Circular Bioeconomy Strategy. In: From Science to 
Policy 5. European Forest Institute, p. 50. 
Hynynen, J., Ojansuu, R., H¨okk¨a, H., Siipilehto, J., Salminen, H., Haapala, P., 2002. 
Models for predicting stand development in MELA system. In: 
Mets¨antutkimuslaitoksen tiedonantoja, 835. Mets¨antutkimuslaitos, p. 116. 
Jonsson, M., Bengtsson, J., Gamfeldt, L., Moen, J., Sn¨all, T., 2020. Stand age and climate 
influence forest ecosystem service delivery and multifunctionality. Environ. Res. 
Lett. 15, 0940a8. 
Kellom¨aki, S., Peltola, H., Nuutinen, T., Korhonen, K.T., Strandman, H., 2008. Sensitivity 
of managed boreal forests in Finland to climate change, with implications for 
adaptive management. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. Ser. B Biol. Sci. 363, 2341–2351. 
Knoke, T., Paul, C., Hildebrandt, P., Calvas, B., Castro, L.M., Hartl, F., Dollerer, M., 
Hamer, U., Windhorst, D., Wiersma, Y.F., Curatola Fern´andez, G.F., Obermeier, W. 
A., Adams, J., Breuer, L., Mosandl, R., Beck, E., Weber, M., Stimm, B., Haber, W., 
Fürst, C., Bendix, J., 2016. Compositional diversity of rehabilitated tropical lands 
supports multiple ecosystem services and buffers uncertainties. Nat. Commun. 7. 
Kontula, T., Raunio, A., 2019. Threatened Habitat Types in Finland 2018. Red List of 
Habitats – Results and Basis for Assessment, the Finnish Environment 2/2019. 
Finnish Environment Institute and Ministry of the Environment, Helsinki, p. 254. 
Kr¨oger, M., Raitio, K., 2017. Finnish forest policy in the era of bioeconomy: a pathway to 
sustainability? Forest Policy Econ. 77, 6–15. 
Kurttila, M., Pukkala, T., Loikkanen, J., 2002. The performance of alternative spatial 
objective types in forest planning calculations: a case for flying squirrel and moose. 
For. Ecol. Manag. 166, 245–260. 
Lehtonen, I., Ven¨al¨ainen, A., K¨am¨ar¨ainen, M., Peltola, H., Gregow, H., 2016. Risk of 
large-scale fires in boreal forests of Finland under changing climate. Nat. Hazards 
Earth Syst. Sci. 16, 239–253. 
Lindner, M., Maroschek, M., Netherer, S., Kremer, A., Barbati, A., Garcia-Gonzalo, J., 
Seidl, R., Delzon, S., Corona, P., Kolstr¨om, M., Lexer, M.J., Marchetti, M., 2010. 
Climate change impacts, adaptive capacity, and vulnerability of European forest 
ecosystems. For. Ecol. Manag. 259, 698–709. 
Liski, J., Palosuo, T., Peltoniemi, M., Siev¨anen, R., 2005. Carbon and decomposition 
model Yasso for forest soils. Ecol. Model. 189, 168–182. 
Lynch, T., Zhang, D., 2011. On relative maxima of diameter growth, basal area growth, 
volume growth, and mean annual increment for individual trees. For. Sci. 57, 
353–358. 
M¨akinen, H., Hynynen, J., Siitonen, J., Siev¨anen, R., 2006. Predicting the decomposition 
of scots pine, Norway spruce, and birch stems in Finland. Ecol. Appl. 16, 1865–1879. 
Marttila, H., Lepist¨o, A., Tolvanen, A., Bechmann, M., Kyllmar, K., Juutinen, A., 
Wenng, H., Skarbøvik, E., Futter, M., Kortelainen, P., Rankinen, K., Hellsten, S., 
Kløve, B., Kronvang, B., Kaste, Ø., Solheim, A.L., Bhattacharjee, J., Rakovic, J., de 
Wit, H., 2020. Potential impacts of a future Nordic bioeconomy on surface water 
quality. Ambio 49, 1722–1735. 
Matala, J., Ojansuu, R., Peltola, H., Siev¨anen, R., Kellom¨aki, S., 2005. Introducing effects 
of temperature and CO2 elevation on tree growth into a statistical growth and yield 
model. Ecol. Model. 181, 173–190. 
Matala, J., Ojansuu, R., Peltola, H., Raitio, H., Kellom¨aki, S., 2006. Modelling the 
response of tree growth to temperature and CO2 elevation as related to the fertility 
and current temperature sum of a site. Ecol. Model. 199, 39–52. 
Mazziotta, A., Podkopaev, D., Trivi˜no, M., Miettinen, K., Pohjanmies, T., M¨onkk¨onen, M., 
2017. Quantifying and Resolving Conservation Conflicts in Forest Landscapes Via 
Multiobjective Optimization. 
McDowell, N.G., Allen, C.D., Anderson-Teixeira, K., Aukema, B.H., Bond-Lamberty, B., 
Chini, L., Clark, J.S., Dietze, M., Grossiord, C., Hanbury-Brown, A., Hurtt, G.C., 
Jackson, R.B., Johnson, D.J., Kueppers, L., Lichstein, J.W., Ogle, K., Poulter, B., 
Pugh, T.A.M., Seidl, R., Turner, M.G., Uriarte, M., Walker, A.P., Xu, C., 2020. 
Pervasive shifts in forest dynamics in a changing world. Science 368, eaaz9463. 
MEA, 2005. Millenium Ecosystem Assessment - Ecosystem and Human Well-Being: 
Snthesis. Island Press, Washington, DC.  
Messier, C., Tittler, R., Kneeshaw, D.D., G´elinas, N., Paquette, A., Berninger, K., 
Rheault, H., Meek, P., Beaulieu, N., 2009. TRIAD zoning in Quebec: experiences and 
results after 5 years. For. Chron. 85, 885–896. 
Messier, C., Bauhus, J., Doyon, F., Maure, F., Sousa-Silva, R., Nolet, P., Mina, M., 
Aquilu´e, N., Fortin, M.-J., Puettmann, K., 2019. The functional complex network 
approach to foster forest resilience to global changes. Forest Ecosyst. 6, 1–16. 
Miettinen, K., 1999a. Nonlinear Multiobjective Optimization. Springer, Boston, MA.  
Miettinen, K., 1999b. A Posteriori Methods, Nonlinear Multiobjective Optimization. 
Springer US, Boston, MA, pp. 77–113. 
Miettinen, K., 1999c. A Priori Methods, Nonlinear Multiobjective Optimization. Springer 
US, Boston, MA, pp. 115–129. 
Miina, J., Hotanen, J.-P., Salo, K., 2009. Modelling the Abundance and Temporal 
Variation in the Production of Bilberry (Vaccinium myrtillus L.) in Finnish Mineral 
Soil Forests. 
Miina, J., Kurttila, M., Calama, R., de Miguel, S., Pukkala, T., 2020. Modelling non- 
timber Forest products for forest management planning in Europe. Curr. Forest. Rep. 
6, 309–322. 
Mina, M., Messier, C., Duveneck, M., Fortin, M.-J., Aquilu´e, N., 2020. Network Analysis 
Can Guide Resilience-Based Management in Forest Landscapes under Global Change. 
Ecological Applications (n/a).  
M¨onkk¨onen, M., Juutinen, A., Mazziotta, A., Miettinen, K., Podkopaev, D., Reunanen, P., 
Salminen, H., Tikkanen, O.-P., 2014. Spatially dynamic forest management to 
sustain biodiversity and economic returns. J. Environ. Manag. 134, 80–89. 
Nabuurs, G.-J., Verweij, P., Eupen, M.V., P´erez-Soba, M., Pülzl, H., Hendriks, K., 2019. 
Next-generation information to support a sustainable course for European forests. 
Nat. Sustain. 2, 815–818. 
Nieminen, M., Sallantaus, T., Ukonmaanaho, L., Nieminen, T.M., Sarkkola, S., 2017. 
Nitrogen and phosphorus concentrations in discharge from drained peatland forests 
are increasing. Sci. Total Environ. 609, 974–981. 
Nieminen, M., H¨okk¨a, H., Laiho, R., Juutinen, A., Ahtikoski, A., Pearson, M., Kojola, S., 
Sarkkola, S., Launiainen, S., Valkonen, S., Penttil¨a, T., Lohila, A., Saarinen, M., 
Haahti, K., M¨akip¨a¨a, R., Miettinen, J., Ollikainen, M., 2018. Could continuous cover 
forestry be an economically and environmentally feasible management option on 
drained boreal peatlands? For. Ecol. Manag. 424, 78–84. 
Nikinmaa, L., Lindner, M., Cantarello, E., Jump, A.S., Seidl, R., Winkel, G., Muys, B., 
2020. Reviewing the use of resilience concepts in Forest sciences. Curr. Forest. Rep. 
6, 61–80. 
Nilsson, M., Zamparutti, T., Petersen, J.E., Nykvist, B., Rudberg, P., McGuinn, J., 2012. 
Understanding policy coherence: analytical framework and examples of 
sector–environment policy interactions in the EU. Environ. Policy Gov. 22, 395–423. 
Ojanen, P., Lehtonen, A., Heikkinen, J., Penttil¨a, T., Minkkinen, K., 2014. Soil CO2 
balance and its uncertainty in forestry-drained peatlands in Finland. For. Ecol. 
Manag. 325, 60–73. 
Otero, I., Farrell, K.N., Pueyo, S., Kallis, G., Kehoe, L., Haberl, H., Plutzar, C., Hobson, P., 
García-M´arquez, J., Rodríguez-Labajos, B., Martin, J.-L., Erb, K.-H., Schindler, S., 
Nielsen, J., Skorin, T., Settele, J., Essl, F., G´omez-Baggethun, E., Brotons, L., 
Rabitsch, W., Schneider, F., Pe’er, G., 2020. Biodiversity policy beyond economic 
growth. Conserv. Lett. 13, e12713. 
Peltola, A., Ihalainen, A., M¨aki-Simola, E., Sauvula-Sepp¨al¨a, T., Torvelainen, J., 
Uotila, E., Vaahtera, E., Ylitalo, E., 2019. Suomen Mets¨atilastot - Finnish Forest 
Statistics. Helsinki, LUKE, p. 198. 
Perera, A.H., Sturtevant, B.R., Buse, L.J., 2015. Simulation modeling of Forest landscape 
disturbances: Where do we go from Here? In: Perera, A.H., Sturtevant, B.R., Buse, L. 
J. (Eds.), Simulation Modeling of Forest Landscape Disturbances. Springer 
International Publishing, Cham, pp. 287–311. 
Peura, M., Burgas, D., Eyvindson, K., Repo, A., M¨onkk¨onen, M., 2018. Continuous cover 
forestry is a cost-efficient tool to increase multifunctionality of boreal production 
forests in Fennoscandia. Biol. Conserv. 217, 104–112. 
van der Plas, F., Ratcliffe, S., Ruiz-Benito, P., Scherer-Lorenzen, M., Verheyen, K., 
Wirth, C., Zavala, M.A., Ampoorter, E., Baeten, L., Barbaro, L., Bastias, C.C., 
C. Blattert et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Forest Policy and Economics 136 (2022) 102689
15
Bauhus, J., Benavides, R., Benneter, A., Bonal, D., Bouriaud, O., Bruelheide, H., 
Bussotti, F., Carnol, M., Castagneyrol, B., Charbonnier, Y., Cornelissen, J.H.C., 
Dahlgren, J., Checko, E., Coppi, A., Dawud, S.M., Deconchat, M., De Smedt, P., De 
Wandeler, H., Domisch, T., Fin´er, L., Fotelli, M., Gessler, A., Granier, A., 
Grossiord, C., Guyot, V., Haase, J., H¨attenschwiler, S., Jactel, H., Jaroszewicz, B., 
Joly, F.-X., Jucker, T., Kambach, S., Kaendler, G., Kattge, J., Koricheva, J., 
Kunstler, G., Lehtonen, A., Liebergesell, M., Manning, P., Milligan, H., Müller, S., 
Muys, B., Nguyen, D., Nock, C., Ohse, B., Paquette, A., Pe˜nuelas, J., Pollastrini, M., 
Radoglou, K., Raulund-Rasmussen, K., Roger, F., Seidl, R., Selvi, F., Stenlid, J., 
Valladares, F., van Keer, J., Vesterdal, L., Fischer, M., Gamfeldt, L., Allan, E., 2018. 
Continental mapping of forest ecosystem functions reveals a high but unrealised 
potential for forest multifunctionality. Ecol. Lett. 21, 31–42. 
Pohjanmies, T., Trivi˜no, M., Le Tortorec, E., Salminen, H., M¨onkk¨onen, M., 2017. 
Conflicting objectives in production forests pose a challenge for forest management. 
Ecosyst. Serv. 28, 298–310. 
Primmer, E., Varumo, L., Krause, T., Orsi, F., Geneletti, D., Brogaard, S., Aukes, E., 
Ciolli, M., Grossmann, C., Hern´andez-Morcillo, M., Kister, J., Kluv´ankov´a, T., 
Loft, L., Maier, C., Meyer, C., Schleyer, C., Spacek, M., Mann, C., 2021. Mapping 
Europe’s institutional landscape for forest ecosystem service provision, innovations 
and governance. Ecosyst. Serv. 47, 101225. 
Pukkala, T., 2016. Which type of forest management provides most ecosystem services? 
Forest Ecosyst. 3, 9. 
Pukkala, T., Kellomaki, S., Mustonen, E., 1988. Prediction of the amenity of a tree stand. 
Scand. J. Forest Res. 3, 533–544. 
Pukkala, T., Nuutinen, T., Kangas, J., 1995. Integrating scenic and recreational amenities 
into numerical forest planning. Landsc. Urban Plan. 32, 185–195. 
Pukkala, T., L¨ahde, E., Laiho, O., 2013. Species interactions in the dynamics of even- and 
uneven-aged boreal forests. J. Sustain. For. 32, 371–403. 
Pukkala, T., Laiho, O., L¨ahde, E., 2016. Continuous cover management reduces wind 
damage. For. Ecol. Manag. 372, 120–127. 
Pülzl, H., Wydra, D., Hogl, K., 2018. Piecemeal integration: explaining and 
understanding 60 years of European Union Forest policy-making. Forests 9, 719. 
Rasinm¨aki, J., M¨akinen, A., Kalliovirta, J., 2009. SIMO: an adaptable simulation 
framework for multiscale forest resource data. Comput. Electron. Agric. 66, 76–84. 
Repo, A., Eyvindson, K.J., Halme, P., M¨onkk¨onen, M., 2020. Forest bioenergy harvesting 
changes carbon balance and risks biodiversity in boreal forest landscapes. Can. J. 
For. Res. 50, 1184–1193. 
von Salzen, K., Scinocca, J.F., McFarlane, N.A., Li, J., Cole, J.N.S., Plummer, D., 
Verseghy, D., Reader, M.C., Ma, X., Lazare, M., Solheim, L., 2013. The Canadian 
fourth generation atmospheric global climate model (CanAM4). Part I: 
representation of physical processes. Atmosphere-Ocean 51, 104–125. 
Seidl, R., Fernandes, P.M., Fonseca, T.F., Gillet, F., J¨onsson, A.M., Merganiˇcov´a, K., 
Netherer, S., Arpaci, A., Bontemps, J.-D., Bugmann, H., Gonz´alez-Olabarria, J.R., 
Lasch, P., Meredieu, C., Moreira, F., Schelhaas, M.-J., Mohren, F., 2011. Modelling 
natural disturbances in forest ecosystems: a review. Ecol. Model. 222, 903–924. 
Seidl, R., Albrich, K., Erb, K., Formayer, H., Leidinger, D., Leitinger, G., Tappeiner, U., 
Tasser, E., Rammer, W., 2019. What drives the future supply of regulating ecosystem 
services in a mountain forest landscape? For. Ecol. Manag. 445, 37–47. 
Sotirov, M., Storch, S., 2018. Resilience through policy integration in Europe? Domestic 
forest policy changes as response to absorb pressure to integrate biodiversity 
conservation, bioenergy use and climate protection in France, Germany, the 
Netherlands and Sweden. Land Use Policy 79, 977–989. 
Tahvanainen, V., Miina, J., Kurttila, M., Salo, K., 2016. Modelling the yields of marketed 
mushrooms in Picea abies stands in eastern Finland. For. Ecol. Manag. 362, 79–88. 
Temperli, C., Blattert, C., Stadelmann, G., Br¨andli, U.-B., Thürig, E., 2020. Trade-offs 
between ecosystem service provision and the predisposition to disturbances: a NFI- 
based scenario analysis. Forest Ecosyst. 7, 27. 
Tolkkinen, M.J., Heino, J., Ahonen, S.H.K., Lehosmaa, K., Mykr¨a, H., 2020. Streams and 
riparian forests depend on each other: a review with a special focus on microbes. For. 
Ecol. Manag. 462, 117962. 
Torssonen, P., Strandman, H., Kellom¨aki, S., Kilpel¨ainen, A., Jylh¨a, K., Asikainen, A., 
Peltola, H., 2015. Do we need to adapt the choice of main boreal tree species in 
forest regeneration under the projected climate change? Forestry 88, 564–572. 
Tuomi, M., Thum, T., J¨arvinen, H., Fronzek, S., Berg, B., Harmon, M., Trofymow, J.A., 
Sevanto, S., Liski, J., 2009. Leaf litter decomposition—estimates of global variability 
based on Yasso07 model. Ecol. Model. 220, 3362–3371. 
Tuomi, M., Laiho, R., Repo, A., Liski, J., 2011. Wood decomposition model for boreal 
forests. Ecol. Model. 222, 709–718. 
Turtiainen, M., Miina, J., Salo, K., Hotanen, J.-P., 2013. Empirical Prediction Models for 
the Coverage and Yields of Cowberry in Finland. 
Ven¨al¨ainen, A., Lehtonen, I., Laapas, M., Ruosteenoja, K., Tikkanen, O.-P., Viiri, H., 
Ikonen, V.-P., Peltola, H., 2020. Climate change induces multiple risks to boreal 
forests and forestry in Finland: a literature review. Glob. Chang. Biol. 26, 
4178–4196. 
Wierzbicki, A.P., 1986. On the completeness and constructiveness of parametric 
characterizations to vector optimization problems. Operations-Research-Spektrum 8, 
73–87. 
Winkel, G., Sotirov, M., 2015. Whose integration is this? European forest policy between 
the gospel of coordination, institutional competition, and a new spirit of integration. 
Environ. Plann. 34, 496–514. 
Wolfslehner, B., Prokofieva, I., Mavsar, R., 2019. Non-wood Forest Products in Europe: 
Seeing the Forest around the Trees. What Science Can Tell us 10. European Forest 
Institute, p. 113. 
Wolfslehner, B., Pülzl, H., Kleinschmit, D., Aggestam, F., Winkel, G., Candel, J., 
Eckerberg, K., Feindt, P., McDermott, C., Secco, L., Sotirov, M., Lackner, M., 
Roux, J.-L., 2020. European Forest Governance Post-2020, From Science to Policy. 
European Forest Institute, p. 51. 
C. Blattert et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
